---
title: Design Principles
description: |
  Unikraft is designed to highly modular, enabling the best-in-class performance
  and security guarantees for your application.  To discover the right approach
  and achieve these goals, understanding the limitations modern OSes was
  necessary.
---

The problem we want to solve is to enable developers to create a specialized OS
for every single application to ensure the best performance possible, security
guarantees or desired target KPI.  The requirement of enabling such high
modularity across multiple system boundaries has led to a number of key design
decisions:

* **Single address space**: Target single application scenarios, with possibly
  different applications talking to each other through networked communications.

* **Fully modular system**: All components, including operating system
  primitives, drivers, platform code and libraries should be easy to add and
  remove as needed; even APIs should be modular.

* **Single protection level**: There should be no user-/kernel-space separation
  to avoid costly processor mode switches. This does not preclude
  compartmentalization (e.g., of micro-libraries), which can be achieved at
  reasonable cost.

* **Static linking**: Enable compiler features, e.g., Dead-Code Elimination and
  Link-Time-Optimization (LTO), to automatically get rid of unneeded code.

* **POSIX support**: In order to support existing or legacy
  applications and programming languages while still allowing for
  specialization under that API.

* **Platform abstraction**: Seamless generation of images for a range of
  different hypervisors/VMMs.


## Problems with Monolithic OSes

To derive the core design principles of Unikraft, it is worth analyzing the
features and (heavyweight) mechanisms of traditional OSes that are unnecessary
or ill-suited to single application use cases:

* Protection-domain switches between the application and the kernel might be
  redundant in a virtualization context because isolation is ensured by the
  hypervisor, and result in measurable performance degradation.

* Multiple address spaces may be useless in a single application domain, but
  removing such support in standard OSes requires a massive reimplementation
  effort.

* For RPC-style server applications, threading is not needed, with a single,
  run-to-completion event loop sufficing for high performance. This would remove
  the need for a scheduler within the VM and its associated overheads, as well
  as the mismatch between the guest and hypervisor schedulers.

* For performance-oriented UDP-based apps, much of the OS networking stack is
  useless: the app could simply use the driver API, much like DPDK-style
  applications already do. There is currently no way to easily remove just the
  network stack but not the entire network sub-system from standard OSes.

* Direct access to NVMe storage from apps removes the need for file descriptors,
  a VFS layer and a filesystem, but removing such support from existing OSes,
  built around layers of the storage API, is very difficult.

* Memory allocators have a large impact on application performance, and general
  purpose allocators have been shown to be suboptimal for many apps. It would
  therefore be ideal if each app could choose its own allocator; this is however
  very difficult to do in today's operating systems because the allocators that
  kernels use are baked in.

This admittedly non-exhaustive list of application-specific optimizations
implies that for each core functionality that a standard OS provides, there
exists at least one or a few applications that do not need it. Removing such
functionality would reduce code size and resource usage but would often require
an important re-engineering effort.


## Approaches to building a unikernel

Given these design decisions, the question thus stems of how to implement such a
system, either: by minimizing an existing general-purpose OS; by starting from
an existing unikernel project; or, starting from scratch.  Existing work has
taken three directions in tackling this problem.


### Minimizing an existing general-purpose OS

The first direction takes existing OSes and adds or removes functionality. Key
examples add support for a single address space and remove protection domain
crossings: [OSv](#) and [RUMP Kernel](#) which adopt parts of [the BSD
kernel](#) and re-engineer it to work in a unikernel context. [Lupine Linux](#)
relies on a minimal, specialized configuration of the Linux kernel with [Kernel
Mode Linux (KML) patches](#).

These approaches make application porting easy because they provide binary
compatibility or POSIX compatibility, but the resulting kernel is monolithic.

Existing monolithic OSes do have APIs for each component, but most APIs are
quite rich as they have evolved organically, and component separation is often
blurred to achieve performance (e.g., sendfile short circuits the networking and
storage stacks).  The Linux kernel, for instance, [historically featured highly
inter-dependent subsystems](https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/302405.302691).

To better quantify this API complexity, we analyzed dependencies between the
main components of the Linux kernel. As a rough approximation, we used the
subdirectories in the kernel source tree to identify (broad) components. [We
used `cscope` to extract all function calls from the sources of all kernel
components](https://github.com/unikraft/eurosys21-artifacts/tree/master/experiments/fig_01_linux-deps),
and then for each call checked to see if the function is defined in the same
component or a different one; in the latter case, we recorded a dependency.  We
plot the dependency graph in Figure 1, the annotations on the edges show the
number of dependencies between nodes.  This dense graph makes it obvious that
removing or replacing any single component in the Linux kernel requires
understanding and fixing all the dependencies of other components, a daunting
task.

<Image
  border
  ratio={3/2}
  maxW={'2xl'}
  src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/unikraft/eurosys21-artifacts/master/plots/fig_01_linux-deps.svg"
  title="Figure 1"
  description="Linux kernel components have strong inter-dependencies, making it
               difficult to remove or replace them."
/>

While full modularization is difficult, modularizing certain parts of a
monolithic kernel has been done succesfully by Rump. There, the NetBSD kernel
was split into base layers (which must be used by all kernels), functions
provided by the host (scheduling, memory allocation,etc) and so-called factions
that can be run on their own (e.g.  network or filesystem support). Rump goes
some way towards achieving our goals, however there are still many dependencies
left which require that all kernels have the base and hypercall layers.
Additionally, the dependencies on the host are limiting in the context of a VM,
which is our target deployment.


### By-passing the OS

The second direction is to bypass the OS altogether, mostly for I/O performance,
while leaving the original stack in place -- wasting resources in the process.
Even here, porting effort is required as apps must be coded against the new
network ([DPDK](https://www.dpdk.org/),
[Netmap](https://github.com/luigirizzo/netmap) or [Linux's `io_uring`
subsystem](https://unixism.net/loti/what_is_io_uring.html)) or storage (SPDK)
API.


### Starting from scratch

The third direction is to add the required OS functionality from scratch for
each target application, possibly by reusing code from existing operating
systems. This is the approach taken by
[ClickOS](https://github.com/sysml/clickos) to support [Click modular
routers](https://github.com/kohler/click), [MirageOS](https://mirage.io/) to
support OCaml applications, and [MiniCache](#) to implement a web cache, to name
a few.  The resulting images are very lean, have great performance and have
small boot times; the big problem is that the porting effort is huge, and that
it has to be mostly repeated for every single application or language.

In sum, starting from an existing project is suboptimal since none of the
projects in the three directions mentioned were designed to support the key
principles we have outlined. We opt for a clean-slate API design approach,
though we do reuse components from existing works where relevant. Course
borrowing parts of code from existing projects, where relevant, in order not to
reinvent the wheel (eg x86_64 KVM boot).


## Unikraft's approach

Unikraft consists of three basic components:

* **Library Components.** Unikraft modules, each of which provides some
  piece of functionality. As is expected of a library, they are the core
  building blocks of an application. Libraries can be arbitrarily small (e.g., a
  small library providing a proof-of-concept scheduler) or as large as standard
  libraries like libc. However, libraries in Unikraft often wrap pre-existing
  libraries, such as openssl, and as such existing applications can still make
  use of relevant, existing systems without having to re-work anything.

* **Configuration.** Inspired by [Linux's KConfig
  system](https://www.kernel.org/doc/html/next/kbuild/kconfig-language.html),
  Unikraft uses this approach to quickly and easily allow users to pick and
  choose which libraries to include in the build process, as well as to
  configure options for each of them, where available. Like KConfig, the menu
  keeps track of dependencies and automatically selects them where applicable.

* **Build Tools.** To seamlessly build and manage Unikraft, its components,
  configuration and its execution is a suite of tools ... core of Unikraft is a
  suite of tools which aid in the creation of the final unikernel image.  Based
  on [GNU Make](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/), it takes care of compiling
  and linking all the relevant modules and of producing images for the different
  platforms selected via the configuration menu.


Unikraft libraries are grouped into two large groups: core (or internal)
libraries, and external libraries. Core libraries generally provide
functionality typically found in operating systems. Such libraries are grouped
into categories such as memory allocators, schedulers, filesystems, network
stacks and drivers, among others. Core libraries are part of the main Unikraft
repo which also contains the build tool and configuration menu.

External libraries consist of existing code not specifically meant for Unikraft.
This includes standard libraries such as libc or openssl, but also run-times
like Python.

Whether core or external, from a user’s perspective these are indistinguishable: they simply show up as libraries in the menu.
